#D3.js part 8 of 9. Interactive tooltips for detailed information
**Name:** Tiety Kooistra

**Category:** Frontend

**Date:** May 2015

----------------------------------------------------------------------
The map makes a lot more sense now with labels and a legend. You already get a general idea about the distribution of arrests in the provinces of The Netherlands, but we can do even better. Lets unlock detailed information about the amount of arrests through a tooltip. You can find the [source code](https://github.com/tietyk/D3/blob/master/Prototype/part8-9.html) and a working [demo](http://tietyk.github.io/D3/Prototype/part8-9.html) on my [github](http://tietyk.github.io/D3/) page.

We start with adding a *div* element to the HTML *section* that contains out map. Because we don't want to show it initially we set the opacity to 0 with the [.style()](https://github.com/mbostock/d3/wiki/Selections#style) method. 

<pre lang='js'>
var tooltip = d3.select("section")
    .append("div")
      .attr("class", "tooltip")
      .style("opacity", 0);
</pre>

The tooltip should be activated and become visible when you move around with your mouse over the map. We need to setup event listeners for that, on each path and label in the map. With the [.on()](https://github.com/mbostock/d3/wiki/Selections#on) method of D3 we can add custom event listeners to our code.

<pre lang='js' mark='8,9,10,19,20,21'>
var map = svg.selectAll("path")
    .data(geo_data.features)
    .enter()
    .append("path")
      .attr("d", path)
      .style("stroke", "black")
      .style("stroke-width", 0.5)
        .on("mouseover", mouseover)
        .on("mousemove", mousemove)
        .on("mouseout", mouseout);

var label = svg.selectAll("text")
    .data(geo_data.features)
    .enter()
    .append("text")
      .attr("class", "label")
      .attr("transform", function(d) { return "translate(" + path.centroid(d) + ")"; })
      .text(function(d) { return d.properties.OMSCHRIJVI;} )
        .on("mouseover", mouseover)
        .on("mousemove", mousemove)
        .on("mouseout", mouseout);
</pre>

When you enter an element with your mouse the tooltip should appear and it should fade away as soon as you don't hover over any element any more. We split up this functionality into two events and functions, *mouseover* and *mouseout*. With the functions we [animate](https://github.com/mbostock/d3/wiki/Selections#transition) the appearing and disappearing of the tooltip with the controlling of the opacity. We need to make a third function, *mousemove*, that actually gets the data and displays it inside the appearing tooltip div.

<pre lang='js'>
function mouseover(){
  tooltip.transition()
    .duration(200)
    .style("opacity", .9);
}

function mousemove(d){
    tooltip .html(d.properties.OMSCHRIJVI  + "<br/>"  + data[d.properties.OMSCHRIJVI][1] + " arrests")
      .style("left", (d3.event.pageX) + "px")
      .style("top", (d3.event.pageY - 50) + "px");
}

function mouseout(){
    tooltip.transition()
      .duration(500)
      .style("opacity", 0);
}
</pre>

With the *mousemove* function we want to display the province name and the number of arrest made there in the current year, index 1 for the year 2000 as in the quantify function. The data was already hooked to the map and label elements and can be accessed in the callback function of the event. Instead of using the [.text()](https://github.com/mbostock/d3/wiki/Selections#text) method again we now use the [.html()](https://github.com/mbostock/d3/wiki/Selections#html) method to be able to add extra structure to the data as well. 

To display the tooltip at the place of the mouse event we use the native JavaScript *.pageX* and *.pageY* methods. We capture the location on the screen and modify it to display the tooltip a little bit above the cursor. To make this all possible we need to set the position to absolute in the CSS rules for the tooltip div. Some extra rules will improve the styling a bit further. 

<pre lang='css'>
div.tooltip {
  position: absolute;
  text-align: center;
  padding: 4px;
  background: #fff;
  border: 0px;
  pointer-events: none;
}
</pre>

**We have detailed information on the screen now about the arrests in a specific province in the year 2000. We have data available for the years 1999 till 2013. When we integrate all those years we can open up even more information. I for one would like to know if it is going better or when it is even getting worse with the arrests in a province. A downward trend would suggest the province becoming saver wouldn't it?**