#D3.js part 2 of 9. Prepare your mapdata with QGIS
**Name:** Tiety Kooistra

**Category:** Frontend

**Date:** April 2015

----------------------------------------------------------------------
In the previous post we collected a [shapefile map](http://opendata.arcgis.com/datasets/975552a98c8241b39d531b0a0b98a78f_0) of the provinces of The Netherlands and we downloaded data about arrests and population from the CBS. In my [github repository](https://github.com/tietyk/D3) you can find the original data and the final products of all the blogs in this series.

###QGIS
In this post I'll explain how you can manipulate a shapefile map into a usable and smaller GeoJSON file. To accomplish this task I will use a geographic information system (GIS), namely [QGIS.](http://qgis.org) This is an open source system you can [download](http://qgis.org/en/site/forusers/download.html) free of charge under GNU licence.

If you have QGIS installed open QGIS desktop to begin working. First we need to load the shapefile we downloaded as a new layer. *Menu bar => Layer => Add layer => Add vector layer.* A popup window with options to add the map will appear. Just browse to the location of your copy of the dataset of the provinces of The Netherlands. If you haven't unzipped the file yet you should, you need to load the *Provincies.shp* file. Now we are up and running to make a usable file for use on the internet.

###Simplify
First task will be to simplify the geographical data of the map. Like with normal images with maps you also strive to optimize between quality and file size. This particular map isn't that big, but if you would have a municipality map of The Netherlands or a world map, the file size will go through the roof vast. Point of attention: saving to the GeoJSON file format will increase the file size with around 50%! That's a serious force to reckon with.

In the menu bar, go to: *Vector => Geometry tools => Simplify geometry*. In the Simplify geometry window I have put the *simplify tolerance* to 0.0005. Always save to a new file, while the effect can not be undone. before hitting OK, check if the correct layer is selected and that the *add result to canvas* box is checked. I'm happy with the resulting file. It lost about 40% in file size without losing to much quality.

###GeoJSON
Only one thing to do before we can start coding with D3. Lets save the new simplified file as GeoJSON. Select the layer in the layer menu on the left of the screen. Right click to open a menu *=> Save as*. In the save window select in the format pulldown the *GeoJSON* format. Check if the CRS (coordinate system) is set to *WGS 84* to save it in a projection that is compatible with D3. Save it to a save place and we are done.

**We finished making a suitable GeoJSON file to use with D3. In the next post I will explain how to draw the map with D3.js.**