#D3.js part 3 of 9. Render a map
**Name:** Tiety Kooistra

**Category:** Frontend

**Date:** April 2015

----------------------------------------------------------------------
Up till now we only collected and manipulated the data. Now we are ready to start using D3.js to render the data to the screen. You can find the working code of this [blogpost](http://tietyk.github.io/D3/Prototype/part3-9.html) and the [final product](http://tietyk.github.io/D3/Prototype/part9-9.html) in my [github reposotory](https://github.com/tietyk/D3)

###Setup the basic structure

To start we need to setup a simple HTML document. A section with a heading and a div is all we need at the moment. Inside the div we will generate the SVG map with D3. Of course we need to load the D3 library, here I use the version on the D3 CDN. Next to loading the library we need a place to put our custom D3 code. Both are inserted at the end of the body. To finish things some basic CSS is added. For readability purposes I will use inline CSS and JavaScript to keep all the code in one place for this project.

<pre lang="html">
&#x3C;!DOCTYPE html&#x3E;
&#x3C;html&#x3E;
	&#x3C;head&#x3E;
	  &#x3C;meta charset=&#x22;utf-8&#x22;&#x3E;
	  &#x3C;style&#x3E;
	    .main-content{
	      width: 1000px;
	      margin: 0 auto;
	      text-align: center;
	      font-size: 12px;
	    }
	    .map {
	      display: inline-block;
	      margin: 0 auto;
	      overflow: hidden;
	    }
	  &#x3C;/style&#x3E;
	&#x3C;/head&#x3E;
	&#x3C;body&#x3E;
	  &#x3C;section class=&#x22;main-content&#x22;&#x3E;
	    &#x3C;h2&#x3E;Arrests per 100.000 inhabitants&#x3C;/h2&#x3E;
	    &#x3C;div id=&#x22;chart&#x22;&#x3E;&#x3C;/div&#x3E;
	  &#x3C;/section&#x3E;
	  &#x3C;!--Load D3 library --&#x3E;
	  &#x3C;script src=&#x22;http://d3js.org/d3.v3.min.js&#x22;&#x3E;&#x3C;/script&#x3E;
	  &#x3C;script type=&#x22;text/javascript&#x22;&#x3E;
	    //place for D3 functions
	  &#x3C;/script&#x3E;
	&#x3C;/body&#x3E;
&#x3C;/html&#x3E;
</pre>

###Load the data
Before we can do anything we first need to load the map we prepared. With the [d3.json](https://github.com/mbostock/d3/wiki/Requests#d3_json) function you can request the JSON file with a GET method. The first argument is the url of the file. Secondly a callback can be specified that will be invoked asynchronously when the file is loaded or the request fails. In our case we load the *provinces.geojson* file and invoke the draw function that we will make next.

<pre lang="js">
d3.json("provinces.geojson", draw);
</pre>

###Create the draw function
Within the draw function we will define all custom behaviour for this project and load additional data when needed. As an attribute the parsed GeoJSON is added to the function. At the end of this post the JavaScript draw function will look like this:

<pre lang="js">
function draw(geo_data) {
  "use strict";
  var width = 750,
      height = 600,
      scale = 6500,
      translateX = -240,
      translateY = 7260;

  var projection = d3.geo.mercator()
      .scale(scale)
      .translate( [translateX, translateY]);

  var path = d3.geo.path().projection(projection);

  var svg = d3.select("#chart")
      .append("svg")
        .attr("width", width)
        .attr("height", height)
        .attr("class", "map");

  var map = svg.selectAll("path")
      .data(geo_data.features)
      .enter()
      .append("path")
        .attr("d", path)
        .style("fill", "lightBlue")
        .style("stroke", "black")
        .style("stroke-width", 0.5);
};
</pre>

Lets run trough the code to explain what it is doing. A commented version of the code is available on [github.](https://github.com/tietyk/D3/blob/master/Prototype/part3-9.html)

#####Set the projection
To render the map correctly we need to set a projection. With the projection we define the way we transform the latitudes and longitudes of the world to a two-dimensional representation. One of the most used and recognizable projections is the [mercator projection](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mercator_projection), so we will use it here as well. We need to set a scale, otherwise the whole world will be used as the extend of the map and The Netherlands would be a tiny speck on the screen. To focus our map we need to specify the location through the *.translate* function and adjust the *.scale* to fill the whole SVG. In the variables I pre-set the scale and coordinates.

With only a projection we aren't able to render the map. We need to create a SVG element and connect the GeoJSON and the projection there to render the map. To make the projection easy to use we should create a *path* variable that contains the projection ready for use on any path element. To make it instantly usable we need to call the projection on the [d3.geo.path()](https://github.com/mbostock/d3/wiki/Geo-Paths#path) method to create a new geographic path generator.

#####Create the SVG
The SVG still needs to be created. D3.js is loaded with a lot of methods to access and manipulate the DOM. When you are familiar with jQuery you will recognize the chaining syntax that is utilized by D3. Adding the SVG is as easy as selecting the element that should contain the SVG and appending it to the DOM with optional attributes or styles wherever needed.

#####Connect the data and the SVG
Now the real magic of D3.js, connecting all the pieces and render it to the screen. First order of business, select all the path elements in the SVG element we just created. You are correct in noticing there are no path elements in the SVG yet. D3 uses this selection to make the binding to the elements we want to connect the data to. Next the data gets loaded, through the JSON parsing the *.features* value is now an array of data. With the *.enter* method each value in the data array gets assigned to an individual newly created path element. The bound data elements, the paths we selected in the first line, are now ready to be appended to the SVG. As an attribute we need to load the projection to the paths we just appended. This will tell the browser how to render the paths in the SVG. To finish of some styles are added to the path elements to make the rendering more pleasing to the eye.

**The map of The Netherlands is drawn on the screen. It isn't really fancy yet, but we have drawn a map on the screen from scratch, that's pretty awesome isn't it? In the next part we will add the arrest data to the map to make it a Choropleth, a thematic map that is shaded based on the underlying data.**