#D3.js part 9 of 9. Display several years of data with a time series
**Name:** Tiety Kooistra

**Category:** Frontend

**Date:** May 2015

----------------------------------------------------------------------
In the previous post we added the tooltip information to the map. Till now we could only display the data from a specific year. In this post we will open the additional data of the years 1999 till 2013 so we can also interpret the data in time. Whit the addition of the time component you can detect trends in the data that reveal if a province got saver or when the amount of arrests sky rocketed. This is the final post in my series about D3.js, you can find the complete collection on [github](http://tietyk.github.io/D3/).

With HTML we first add a timeline to our chart. For every year in our data we create a *div* that we can later use to interact with the data.

<pre lang='html'>
&#x3C;div id=&#x22;timeline&#x22;&#x3E;
  &#x3C;div class=&#x22;time-series active&#x22;&#x3E;1999&#x3C;/div&#x3E;
  &#x3C;div class=&#x22;time-series&#x22;&#x3E;2000&#x3C;/div&#x3E;
  &#x3C;div class=&#x22;time-series&#x22;&#x3E;2001&#x3C;/div&#x3E;
  &#x3C;div class=&#x22;time-series&#x22;&#x3E;2002&#x3C;/div&#x3E;
  &#x3C;div class=&#x22;time-series&#x22;&#x3E;2003&#x3C;/div&#x3E;
  &#x3C;div class=&#x22;time-series&#x22;&#x3E;2004&#x3C;/div&#x3E;
  &#x3C;div class=&#x22;time-series&#x22;&#x3E;2005&#x3C;/div&#x3E;
  &#x3C;div class=&#x22;time-series&#x22;&#x3E;2006&#x3C;/div&#x3E;
  &#x3C;div class=&#x22;time-series&#x22;&#x3E;2007&#x3C;/div&#x3E;
  &#x3C;div class=&#x22;time-series&#x22;&#x3E;2008&#x3C;/div&#x3E;
  &#x3C;div class=&#x22;time-series&#x22;&#x3E;2009&#x3C;/div&#x3E;
  &#x3C;div class=&#x22;time-series&#x22;&#x3E;2010&#x3C;/div&#x3E;
  &#x3C;div class=&#x22;time-series&#x22;&#x3E;2011&#x3C;/div&#x3E;
  &#x3C;div class=&#x22;time-series&#x22;&#x3E;2012&#x3C;/div&#x3E;
  &#x3C;div class=&#x22;time-series&#x22;&#x3E;2013&#x3C;/div&#x3E;
&#x3C;/div&#x3E;
</pre>


With D3 we set an event listener to the new *time-series* elements. By selecting all the elements, d3 creates an array of them in the order that they appeared in the DOM, 0=1999 till 14=2013. This functionality gives us the option to use the index of each element in the array to collect the related data from our arrests database which has the data stored in an array as well. To use this, we setup a *year* variable and set it to equal the index of the time-series element that was triggered. The *year* variable can then be used throughout the application to make all functions able to work with the data series. On screen we want to show which of the years is selected. We do this by resetting the class time-series to all the elements and then set the active state as an extra class to the currently selected one whit the use of the this keyword. 

<pre lang='js'>
var timeline = d3.selectAll(".time-series")
    .on("mouseover", function(d, i) {
      year = i;
      svg.selectAll("path")
        .attr("class", quantify);
      d3.selectAll(".time-series")
        .attr("class", "time-series");
      this.className = "time-series active";
    });
</pre>

<pre lang='js' mark='2,3'>
function quantify(d) {
  year = year || 0;
  var f = data[d.properties.OMSCHRIJVI][year];
  return "q" + Math.min(8, ~~((f-250) / 150)) + "-9";
}
</pre>

Now that the data can be loaded for each year it would be nice to make a comparison between the currently selected year and the arrests of the year before. In the tooltip we will show an upward pointing red arrow if the amount of arrests has increased or a green downward pointing one if there are less arrests then the year before. We create a custom *trend()* function with an if statement to determine first if there is data available from the year before. Then by subtracting the arrests of the current year from the year before we can figure out if the trend is up or down. If the value is below zero there are more arrests this year, so a number higher then zero would mean less arrests. For good measure we also put an equal option into the if statement.

<pre lang='js' mark='2'>
function mousemove(d){
    tooltip .html(d.properties.OMSCHRIJVI + " " + trend(d) +  "<br/>"  + data[d.properties.OMSCHRIJVI][year] + " arrests")
      .style("left", (d3.event.pageX) + "px")
      .style("top", (d3.event.pageY - 50) + "px");
}

function trend(d) {
  if(!data[d.properties.OMSCHRIJVI][year-1]){
    return "";
  } else if( ((data[d.properties.OMSCHRIJVI][year-1])-(data[d.properties.OMSCHRIJVI][year])) > 0 ){
    return "<span class='trend pos'>&#8600;</span>";
  } else if( ((data[d.properties.OMSCHRIJVI][year-1])-(data[d.properties.OMSCHRIJVI][year])) === 0 ){
    return "<span class='trend'>=</span>";
  } else {
    return "<span class='trend neg'>&#8599;</span>";
  }
}
</pre>

Last but not least we add some final CSS styling. We align all the years of the time-series horizontally above the map and give the active year a different background color. For the trend information we edit the font a bit so the arrow is visually the same size as the font and give it its color based on the up- or downward trend.

<pre lang='css'>
#timeline{
  width: 750px;
  margin: 0 auto;
}
.time-series {
  width:50px;
  background: #eee;
  margin:0;
  padding:0;
  text-align:center;
  line-height: 30px;
  float: left;
}
.active {
  background: #b4b4b4;
  color:white;
}
.trend {
  font-weight: bold;
  font-size: 110%;
}
.pos {
  color: #1a9850;
}
.neg {
  color: #d73027;
}
</pre>

**This rounds up this tutorial about making an interactive map with D3. Good luck with your own projects. I hope I have been able to explain some basic concepts of D3.js to you all.**