#D3.js part 5 of 9. Zoom functionality
**Name:** Tiety Kooistra

**Category:** Frontend

**Date:** May 2015

----------------------------------------------------------------------
We have made a nice choropleth map up till now, but is hasn't got any interactivity or explanation of the data yet. Lets start with adding zoom functionality to the map. To check out the results of this post go to the [demo](http://tietyk.github.io/D3/Prototype/part5-9.html) on [github](http://tietyk.github.io/D3/).

###Create zoom behaviour
D3 ships with custom behaviour methods for zoom functionality, [d3.behavior.zoom()](https://github.com/mbostock/d3/wiki/Zoom-Behavior). To create the functionality you create a variable so you can call it from your SVG wherever you need it. In this case we will set a limit to the scale factor so you cant zoom in or out to far with *.scaleExtend()*. To listen for interaction with the map we need to setup an event listener with *.on()* method. When the zoom event gets triggered it will fire of the custom function *zoomhandler*.

<pre lang="js">
var zoom = d3.behavior.zoom()
    .scaleExtent([1, 8])
    .on("zoom", zoomhandler);
</pre>

In the *zoomhandler* function the scale and location parameters of the map will be changed based on the zoom interaction. It will add new attributes to the SVG that will overwrite the translate and scale attributes that were set initially in the projection.

<pre lang="js">
function zoomhandler() {
  svg.attr("transform", "translate(" + d3.event.translate + ")scale(" + d3.event.scale + ")");
}
</pre>

###Connect the zoom behaviour to the SVG
We need to select the correct layer in the SVG to add the zoom function to. We will add a new *g* element to the SVG with the id *zoomgroup*. This will be a direct child of the SVG element, on this element we will *call* the *zoom* variable where we stored the functionality.

<pre lang='js' mark="6,7,8">
var svg = d3.select("#chart")
    .append("svg")
      .attr("width", width)
      .attr("height", height)
      .attr("class", "map")
    .append("g")
      .attr("id","zoomgroup")
      .call(zoom);
</pre>

There is still one bug to fix now. The map is only zooming if you interact with the drawn and shaded province paths. Seas, lakes and rivers for instance are not drawn but suggested by negative space, those areas do not respond to the zoom behaviour yet. To fix that we will add an *rect* element as a first child to the *zoomgroup* element. This element will act as an overlay to make every spot on the map reactive to the zoom event.

<pre lang='js'>
svg.append("rect")
    .attr("class", "overlay")
    .attr("width", width)
    .attr("height", height);
</pre>

To keep the overlay from blocking the view of the map we need to remove its fill by setting it to none. The view is not the only thing that was blocked. We also need to restore the *pointer-events* from paths/children that are added after in the overlay rectangle, otherwise we will not be able to interact with all the map elements later.

<pre lang='css'>
.overlay {
  fill: none;
  pointer-events: all;
}
</pre>

*Possible improvements*  
At the moment the zoom behaviour also enables unlimited panning of the map. It would be nice to set a bounding box to the map so you cant accidentally put it out of view by panning and zooming.

**With the zooming capability we have now added a first layer of interaction to the map. In the following posts we'll build in more interaction and add explanatory elements. Lets get started with putting in some geographical labels.**